[connect-tcp] Remove bare TCP payload mode (#2943)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-connect-tcp.md

# Specification

A template-driven TCP transport proxy for HTTP is identified by a URI Template {{!RFC6570}} containing variables named "target_host" and "target_port".  This URI Template and its variable values MUST meet all the same requirements as for UDP proxying ({{!RFC9298, Section 2}}), and are subject to the same validation rules.  The client MUST substitute the destination host and port number into this template to produce the request URI.  The derived URI serves as the destination of a Capsule Protocol connection using the Upgrade Token "connect-tcp" (see registration in {#new-upgrade-token}).

> When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of a new Capsule Type named DATA (see registration in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of DATA capsule payloads represents the main payload data stream in any protocol where this is well-defined.  Intermediaries MAY split or merge DATA capsules.

Reviewer: Two suggested changes here:
1. I think it would help to reuse the data stream concept from [the capsule document](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9297#section-3.1)
2. I know this predates this PR, but the notion of "in any protocol where this is well-defined" is not fully clear to me. I think if we just cite the data stream then this becomes well defined anywhere where there is a data stream, which is anywhere there are no HTTP messages.

```suggestion
When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of a new Capsule Type named DATA (see registration in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of DATA capsule payloads represents the data stream (as defined in {{Section 3.1 of !RFC9297}}).  Intermediaries MAY split or merge DATA capsules.
```

Author: I don't think we can say this.  All capsules live _inside_ the data stream, including.  DATA creates something like a new "nested" data stream whose meaning is specific to the Upgrade Token, but connect-tcp is the first Capsule Protocol Upgrade Token that has a stream of this kind.

I've rephrased this paragraph to avoid "in any protocol where this is well-defined" and tried to separate the speculative future applications from the specific use in this draft.

# Specification

A template-driven TCP transport proxy for HTTP is identified by a URI Template {{!RFC6570}} containing variables named "target_host" and "target_port".  This URI Template and its variable values MUST meet all the same requirements as for UDP proxying ({{!RFC9298, Section 2}}), and are subject to the same validation rules.  The client MUST substitute the destination host and port number into this template to produce the request URI.  The derived URI serves as the destination of a Capsule Protocol connection using the Upgrade Token "connect-tcp" (see registration in {#new-upgrade-token}).

When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of a new Capsule Type named DATA (see registration in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of DATA capsule payloads represents the TCP payload data.

> Intermediaries MAY split or merge DATA capsules.  Future CPUTs may use DATA capsules to represent their main data stream, if applicable.

Reviewer 2: Thinking about this... should we add a `FLUSH` capsule to force intermediates to flush data and prevent proxies from buffering / concatenating the payload?

> Intermediaries MAY split or merge DATA capsules.  Future CPUTs may use DATA capsules to represent their main data stream, if applicable.

Author: I agree, we probably don't want intermediaries reordering DATA chunks around other capsules in the stream.  I've added the word "adjacent" to prevent that.

This limitation makes me question the value of the split/merge permission.  I think it makes sense for consistency with H2 DATA frames, but I don't know why anyone would actually implement it.

In addition to the TCP payload data stream, TCP also has a bunch of other obscure features like the "Push" flag (which is pretty much like a flush) and "Urgent" (which is even weirder).  We mostly ignore that stuff, and Classic HTTP CONNECT just bleaches it all.

With Capsules we have the option of bringing some of that stuff back, but I think we can leave that all to future extensions.

> Intermediaries MAY split or merge DATA capsules.  Future CPUTs may use DATA capsules to represent their main data stream, if applicable.

Reviewer 2: AFAIK, the push flag is heavily used and added to TCP flags of the packet containing the last bit of data sent from the userland, so it would be unfortunate to lose it.

Notably, I want to avoid situation where things work without when communicating directly, but stop working (or work in degraded fashion) with added intermediary, because we start dropping flags for no reason.

> Intermediaries MAY split or merge DATA capsules.  Future CPUTs may use DATA capsules to represent their main data stream, if applicable.

Author: I'm pretty sure that the "push" flag is already "bleached" by all existing implementations of HTTP CONNECT over TLS, so I don't think we need to reintroduce it in this draft.  I believe we're in a good position to add support for "push" later if needed.

> Intermediaries MAY split or merge DATA capsules.  Future CPUTs may use DATA capsules to represent their main data stream, if applicable.

Reviewer 2: Sure, fine with me. This was mostly a side-comment wrt merged DATA capsules, anyway.

## In HTTP/1.1

In HTTP/1.1, the client uses the proxy by issuing a request as follows:

* The method SHALL be "GET".
* The request's target SHALL correspond to the URI derived from expansion of the proxy's URI Template.
* The request SHALL include a single "Host" header field containing the origin of the proxy.
* The request SHALL include a "Connection" header field with the value "Upgrade".  (Note that this requirement is case-insensitive as per {{Section 7.6.1 of !RFC9110}}.)
* The request SHALL include an "Upgrade" header field with the value "connect-tcp".

> * The request SHOULD include a "Capsule-Protocol: ?1" header.

Author: I'm open to `MUST` or `SHOULD`.  `SHOULD` is more consistent with CONNECT-UDP (etc.), but `MUST` would be more convenient for draft-kb-capsule-conversion.

> * The request SHOULD include a "Capsule-Protocol: ?1" header.

Reviewer 2: @DavidSchinazi?

> * The request SHOULD include a "Capsule-Protocol: ?1" header.

Reviewer: Both options make sense to me, I don't have a strong preference between them. Slight preference for consistency with connect-udp

> * The request SHOULD include a "Capsule-Protocol: ?1" header.

Reviewer 2: OK, let's leave it as-is... I don't have a strong preference either, but I figured it was worth calling it out.

# Specification

A template-driven TCP transport proxy for HTTP is identified by a URI Template {{!RFC6570}} containing variables named "target_host" and "target_port".  This URI Template and its variable values MUST meet all the same requirements as for UDP proxying ({{!RFC9298, Section 2}}), and are subject to the same validation rules.  The client MUST substitute the destination host and port number into this template to produce the request URI.  The derived URI serves as the destination of a Capsule Protocol connection using the Upgrade Token "connect-tcp" (see registration in {{new-upgrade-token}}).

> When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of new Capsule Types named DATA and FINAL_DATA (see registrations in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of these capsule payloads represents the TCP payload data.  A FINAL_DATA capsule additionally indicates that sender has closed this stream, semantically equivalent to TCP FIN.  After sending a FINAL_DATA capsule, an endpoint MUST NOT send any more DATA or FINAL_DATA capsules on this data stream. (See {{closing-connections}} for related requirements.)

Author: The strongest argument I see for FINAL_DATA is that it guarantees* correct shutdown handling through semi-compliant HTTP/1.1 intermediaries.  In particular, unclean shutdown signalling is often difficult to implement in HTTP/1.1, where (absent a signal in the Capsule Protocol) it requires injecting a TLS alert (or TCP RST), but TLS and TCP APIs don't always offer this ability.  Previous versions of this draft suggested signalling by sending a truncated capsule, but this requires piercing an abstraction barrier that might reasonably be exposed by a Capsule Protocol implementation.

Even if the client and server are both speaking HTTP/3, there could be an HTTP/1.1 "hop" in between that "bleaches" the stream error.

*Nothing is ever guaranteed.

> When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of new Capsule Types named DATA and FINAL_DATA (see registrations in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of these capsule payloads represents the TCP payload data.  A FINAL_DATA capsule additionally indicates that sender has closed this stream, semantically equivalent to TCP FIN.  After sending a FINAL_DATA capsule, an endpoint MUST NOT send any more DATA or FINAL_DATA capsules on this data stream. (See {{closing-connections}} for related requirements.)

Author: OK, I have moved FINAL_DATA out of this PR and into a separate one (#2949).

I can say that I have personally fought with (1) applications that silently lost data due to truncation and (2) broken Happy Eyeballs with proxies that reported successful connection because the implementation had no way to report failure, so I do believe these issues are real, though maybe not the most common.

# Specification

A template-driven TCP transport proxy for HTTP is identified by a URI Template {{!RFC6570}} containing variables named "target_host" and "target_port".  This URI Template and its variable values MUST meet all the same requirements as for UDP proxying ({{!RFC9298, Section 2}}), and are subject to the same validation rules.  The client MUST substitute the destination host and port number into this template to produce the request URI.  The derived URI serves as the destination of a Capsule Protocol connection using the Upgrade Token "connect-tcp" (see registration in {{new-upgrade-token}}).

> When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of new Capsule Types named DATA and FINAL_DATA (see registrations in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of these capsule payloads represents the TCP payload data.  A FINAL_DATA capsule indicates that sender has closed this stream, semantically equivalent to TCP FIN.  After sending a FINAL_DATA capsule, an endpoint MUST NOT send any more DATA or FINAL_DATA capsules on this data stream. (See {{closing-connections}} for related requirements.)

Author: I think it's mentioned several times here.  I've made one small change to make that clearer: "A FINAL_DATA capsule **additionally** indicates...".

An intermediary MAY merge and split successive DATA and FINAL_DATA capsules, subject to the following requirements:

* There are no intervening capsules of other types.
* The order of payload content is preserved.
* The final emitted capsule uses the same capsule type (DATA or FINAL_DATA) as the final input capsule, and all others use the DATA capsule type.

> In "connect-tcp", Context ID 0 is reserved for DATA, and Context ID 1 is reserved for FINAL_DATA.  Future CPUTs may also use DATA and FINAL_DATA capsules to represent their main data stream, if applicable.

Author: This was just wrong.  Removed.

Clients SHOULD assume that all proxy resources generated by a single template share a protection space (i.e., a realm) ({{?RFC9110, Section 11.5}}).  For many authentication schemes, this will allow the client to avoid waiting for a "401 (Unauthorized)" response before each new connection through the proxy.

## Closing Connections

In each HTTP version, any requirements related to closing connections in Classic HTTP CONNECT also apply to "connect-tcp", with the following modifications:

> * In HTTP/1.1, endpoints SHOULD send an incomplete DATA capsule to indicate receipt of a TCP connection error (e.g., a TCP RST or timeout).  When a connection is terminated with any incomplete capsule, or with an error in the underlying connection (e.g. a TLS "internal_error" alert or TCP RST), the endpoint SHOULD send a TCP RST if the underlying TCP implementation permits it.

Reviewer 2: What's "incomplete DATA capsule"?

Reviewer 2: What if there is no data in-flight (i.e. an idle connection)? Should intermediaries inject malformed `DATA` frame?

Reviewer: Since we're now always using capsules, I think there's value in making this an explicit signal. How about adding a DATA_END capsule of length_zero and requiring to send that? If the stream closes without receiving that, then it means it was aborted.

Alternate encoding: is to have two capsule types for DATA and a FIN bit, like we do for STREAM frames in QUIC.

Author: BIKESHED TIME

There are a bunch of different ways a TCP connection can end.  At a minimum, there's the distinction between FIN and RST, but there's also timeout (dead air), interface going down, ICMP Unreachable, proxy-injected errors like "quota exceeded", etc.  We have to decide how much detail to encode, and how to encode it.

The simplest option, as you say, would probably be something like an empty DATA_END capsule indicating clean shutdown, with RST assumed otherwise.

Reviewer 3: FIN vs RST is a useful distinction. It's something we accomodate in H2 and H3 CONNECT. I'd be happy to consider those in scope to address but punt on others

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need `DATA_END` capsule to signal a clean shutdown, we could use an empty `DATA` for that. This is how BSD sockets and other applications transmit `FIN` to userland.

But yes, using either empty `DATA` or adding a `flags` field with a `FIN` bit to signal a clean shutdown, and using the lack of that signal and a termination of the underlying transport to signal connection reset seems better than injecting malformed `DATA` frames.

Reviewer 2: > There are a bunch of different ways a TCP connection can end. At a minimum, there's the distinction between FIN and RST, but there's also timeout (dead air), interface going down, ICMP Unreachable, proxy-injected errors like "quota exceeded", etc. We have to decide how much detail to encode, and how to encode it.

We have to be able to emit those back to TCP endpoints, so the amount of details and bike-sheding that we can do here is limited.

Reviewer: DID SOMEONE SAY BIKESHED??? I'M ENTHUSIASTIC

I never liked the fact that reading 0 on a BSD socket means "end of stream" for TCP. It's odd, and inconsistent with other uses (e.g., for UDP it means "I received a UDP packet with no payload").

We should definitely separate between "clean termination" (TCP FIN) and "abortive termination" (TCP RST, timeout, etc.) but I don't think we need to separate RST from timeout. That would match what classic CONNECT does.

So, +1 for DATA capsule with a FIN bit :)

Author: A FIN bit adds overhead to every DATA capsule, which seems unappealing to me.  A zero-length DATA capsule seems fine to me (AFAIK we don't have any other use for length=0), but otherwise I would define a new capsule type ... probably a type meaning "clean shutdown", so that underlying transport failures naturally are treated as "unclean".

Reviewer: Sorry I meant putting the FIN bit in the capsule type. That can be described as two separate capsules (DATA = 0xTBD, DATA_END=0xTBD+1) or as a bit (DATA = 0xTBD..0xTBD+1, lowest bit of capsule type means FIN) but they're the same thing on the wire

In each HTTP version, any requirements related to closing connections in Classic HTTP CONNECT also apply to "connect-tcp", with the following modifications:

> * If the TCP sender send a TCP FIN indicating clean shutdown, the endpoint in this specification MUST send a FINAL_DATA capsule.

Author: Done

* When a connection is terminated without a FINAL_DATA capsule, the endpoint SHOULD send a TCP RST if the underlying TCP implementation permits it.

> * In HTTP/2 and HTTP/3, senders MAY additionally set stream-level error flags as in Classic HTTP CONNECT.

Author: Changed to "emit a stream error", which seems to be the term used in RFC 9113 and RFC 9114.

IF APPROVED, IANA is requested to add the following entry to the "HTTP Capsule Types" registry:

| ----- | ------------ | --------- | ---------------------------------- | ----------------- | ------- |
| Value | Capsule Type | Status    | Reference                          | Change Controller | Contact |
| (TBD) | DATA         | permanent | (This document), {{specification}} | IETF              | HTTPBIS |

> | (TBD) | FINAL_DATA   | permanent | (This document), {{specification}} | IETF              | HTTPBIS |

Author: Done
